Hello, I'm professor Brian Bushee.
Welcome back.
In this video, we're going to take
a look at a fraud prediction model.
So this is going to be a very different
approach from what we've been looking
at so far.
So far we've been trying to look at
individual line items, like revenues or
expenses, or components of earnings
like accrual, or cash earnings,
to try to see whether they look different
or unusual based on what we would expect.
The approach today is let's just look at
firms that have committed fraud, look at
some firms that didn't commit fraud, and
try to figure out how they're different.
So, throw in as many ratios
as we can think about and
use statistical techniques to see
which ratios best explain what firm
ends up being a fraud firm versus what
firm ends up being not a fraud firm.
So it's a different approach to coming up
with detecting earnings management and
let's see how it works.
Let's get started.
In general, the goal of fraud prediction
models is to examine companies that have
been caught committing fraud, to try to
model how they differ from companies that
are not caught committing fraud.
And they'll use various statistical
techniques to try to choose a small set
of variables or ratios that provide
the best explanatory power,
do the best job of identifying the fraud
firms versus the not fraud firms.
The advantage of this approach is they're
specifically tailored to characteristics
of fraud firms.
So we look at who we
actually know is guilty
to see how they differ
from other companies.
And the model parameters are fixed,
which means they don't have to be
re-estimated for each company.
So forget the time series and
cross-sectional industry approaches.
There's one set of model parameters that
are used for every company in every year.
Disadvantages, the models are based on
companies that were actually caught
committing huge frauds,
which means it's gonna tend towards more
extreme forms of earnings management, and
it may not pick up more subtle
forms of earnings management.
And the models return a large
number of false positives.
>> False positive?
What the diva are you talking about?
>> Excellent question, so
a positive result would be where
the measure indicates something's a fraud,
a negative result would be where
the measure indicates it's not a fraud.
So a false positive would be where
the measure says it's a fraud, but
it's really not.
A false negative would be where
the measure says it's not a fraud, but
it really is.
So any kind of model is gonna trade off
these false positives and false negatives.
And in these models tend to try
to reduce the false negatives,
try to reduce the situations where
the models say it's not a fraud but
it actually is, because you
really wanna detect these frauds.
But the cost is that you're gonna
detect more companies as frauds that
really aren't.
But I guess better safe than sorry.
We're gonna just focus on
one of these models and
the model is the Beneish M-score,
which has been found to have preformed
the best over the last 20 years.
It was developed by
Danielle Beneish in 1999 and
successfully flagged 12 of 17 high
profile frauds since that point.
The Beneish M-Score is
based on eight ratios.
A higher M-Score means higher
likelihood of manipulation.
So it's called M-Score because
of the manipulation score.
And the ratios we're gonna look at use
comparisons between the current year and
the prior year.
So the first ratio is days
sales receivable index or DSRI.
This is gonna be days receivable divided
by prior days receivable, where days
receivable is defined a little bit
differently than we did it in the past.
It's receivables divided
by sales times 365.
An increase in this could
suggest revenue manipulation.
The Gross Margin Index, or GMI, is prior
gross margin divided by gross margin,
where gross margin again is sales minus
cost of good sold divided by sales.
This is gonna flag deteriorating
earnings prospects,
which may create an incentive to
manipulate earnings during a period.
Next is an asset quality index, AQI.
This is asset quality divided
by prior asset quality,
where asset quality is total assets minus
the sum of current assets and PP&E,
all divided by total assets.
This is intended to measure soft assets or
intangible assets, for
which the realization of
benefits is uncertain.
For example, they could suggest
excessive capitalization of costs,
as we saw in the expense
recognition videos.
Sales growth index, or SGI,
is gonna be sales over prior sales.
So growth companies often face
pressure to meet earnings targets and
have high capital needs, providing higher
incentives to manipulate earnings.
The Depreciation Index,
or DEPI, is gonna be prior depreciation
rate over current depreciation rate,
where depreciation rate is depreciation
divided by depreciation plus PP&E.
A ratio greater than one could indicate
the depreciation rate has slowed,
which could reflect income increasing
depreciation policy changes.
>> Zut Alors!
Could you make this any more boring?
At least this is named for
another citoyen francais!
>> Yeah, I'm sorry I can't crunch through
these eight ratios in a more exciting
fashion, but
at least we only have three more to go.
And by the way,
although Daniel Beneish does speak French,
I think he's a Canadian citizen and
not a French citizen.
Next we have the SG&A index, or SGAI.
This is the SG&A ratio divided
by prior SG&A ratio where
the SG&A ratio is SG&A expense over sales.
This would indicate
decreasing SG&A efficiency,
which may predispose companies
to manipulate earnings.
We have total accrual to total assets,
the TATA ratio.
This is a accruals
divided by total assets,
where accruals are defined similar
to what we've done before.
It's net income before extraordinary
items, minus cash from operations.
This is the proxy for non-cash earnings,
which as we've seen are easier to
manipulate than cash earnings.
Then there's a leverage index, LVGI, which
is leverage divided by prior leverage,
where leverage is long term debt plus
liabilities, all divided by total assets.
This captures incentives
to avoid debt covenants.
If you're highly levered, you have more
incentives to manipulate your earnings to
avoid violating debt covenants and
becoming in default.
So the M-Score is going
to be an intercept,
plus the sum of all of the weights on the
variables, times the variables themselves.
Where in this case the weights are gonna
be the same for all companies, and
here are the weights that we're
gonna use for each of the variables.
>> Dude,
like what do you mean by variable?
And dude, it is like not cool to
talk about a company's weight.
>> In this case,
weight actually refers to a coefficient or
parameter estimate, not to
the actual heaviness of the company.
So although the terminology's different,
it's exactly the same approach as we did
with discretionary accruals and
discretionary expenditures.
To get the normal levels of accruals or
normal levels of expenditures,
we took an intercept, and
then we took the estimate b and
c parameters, times the value
of the variable for the company.
In this case, the variables are just
the values of the ratios for each company.
And what I'll do now is I'll go through
an example of how to put together
this M-score.
So as an example, let's bring in
the value of all these variables for
company X in the year 2015.
So, I've filled that in this column.
One not at the bottom is sometimes it's
hard to get data to calculate SGAI,
AQI, or DEPI.
So if you can't do that, Beneish has
found that you can just set them equal to
one and
the model would still work pretty well.
So now that we have the variables, we can
take the weight times the variable, so
the intercept will just carry over.
But then for DSRI, we would take the
weight on that times the value of DSRI for
this company in 2015.
To get the product of the weight and the
variable, we add up this last column and
we get an M-Score of negative 0.442.
And what Beneish has found, is that
an M-Score that's greater than -1.78
is a red flag that indicates a potential
manipulator, a potential fraud firm.
>> Dude,
where did y'all come up with -1.78?
>> So the -1.78 was chosen to try to
balance off these false positives and
false negatives.
So it was the point in the original
research where Daniel Beneish
found that you got an acceptable
small level of false negatives
without getting too many false positives.
Now, probably could have
rescaled the score so
that it was zero instead of -1.78,
but hey we're accounting professors.
Accounting professors are sort of geeky.
And so we like things where the cut
off is minus 1.78 as opposed
to something more user friendly like zero.
Let's take a look at how to
calculate the M-Score for a company.
The case we're gonna do is Dogron.
Dogron is one of the world's major
electricity, natural gas, commodities,
communications, and pulp and
paper companies for dogs.
>> Really?
Dogron?
Really?
>> Yeah, so
this one is a little hard to disguise.
Dogron is really Enron.
Enron, of course,
was one of the biggest financial reporting
scandals of the last 50 years or so.
Huge financial statement fraud,
resulting in the biggest bankruptcy
in US history at the time.
I guess since the company
has gone bankrupt,
there probably are not any company lawyers
that are still around to sue me for
saying bad things about the company.
So why don't we go ahead and just
admit this is Enron and call it Enron.
So anyway, Enron was one of the world's
major electricity, natural gas,
commodities, communications,
and pulp and paper companies.
In October of 2001,
Enron was found to have committed fraud in
the reporting of its financial statements.
It used Special Purpose Entities,
Mark-to-Market Accounting and
other tricks to manipulate
its financial statements.
Ended up declaring bankruptcy within
one month of the news of the fraud, so
it collapsed very quickly.
And it's auditor, Arthur Andersen,
was forced to close after
an obstruction of justice charge.
Andersen was one of the big five auditors,
long history,
this scandal brought the company down,
and they went out of business.
So let's see, how does the M-score
work for a company like Enron,
that we know ended up
committing a big fraud?
So here is the spreadsheet for
Enron, where I've pulled in all the raw
data I need to calculate these ratios and
you can see that it's a lot
of raw data that you need.
The columns in purple are the ratios
that go into the M-score.
Then, what I do is I have an M-score
column where I have the formula built in.
So if we zoom in on the formula,
you can see I've got the intercept,
plus the weights times the cell
where we calculate each ratio.
And because the weights are the same for
every firm and ever year,
we can just leave this formula and put
any company in there and it should work.
So what we see is in 2000,
the year before the fraud got revealed,
there was this -0.44 M-score.
Now remember an M-score where
the number is less than -1.78 is
indication that it's not a fraud.
If the M-score is greater than -1.78,
then it is a potential fraud.
So in this case it would have
flagged Enron as a potential fraud.
Now what you'd have to do though is you'd
have to check their earnings measure
incentives, benchmark against competitors.
Even so, remember these models have
a lot of false positives, so if you saw
something like this, then you might wanna
go and look at some of the revenue and
expense ratios we've talked about,
discretionary accruals,
discretion expenditures,
to see if you can find more evidence.
So this is a good first step to red-flag a
company where there's potential concerns.
But you're gonna wanna gather a lot
of other measures before you have
confidence that you really
have picked up a fraud.
So that wraps up our look at the
Beneish M-score fraud prediction model.
As you can tell,
I'm a bit skeptical about it.
Anything that's really easy to implement
is also gonna be not that powerful
as the more complicated models are.
It certainly detected fraud for
Enron very well,
but then again [LAUGH] any fraud
prediction model better detect fraud for
Enron, otherwise it will
never get published.
I do think it's a good,
easy first step to identify firms
that you should be suspicious in,
and then you can dig in further with other
of these tools that we've talked about.
But another tool for your tool kit.
We've got one more to add.
And I will see you next video.
>> See you next video.